---
title: 'Synthetic Controls in Dense Settings: the $\ell_2$ relaxer'
date: 2025-01-24
permalink: /posts/2025/01/scdense/
---

Plenty of posts have been done in the last decade on [the synthetic control method](https://doi.org/10.1198/jasa.2009.ap08746) and related approaches; folks from [Microsoft](https://medium.com/data-science-at-microsoft/causal-inference-using-synthetic-controls-d96a890c83a7), [Databricks](https://towardsdatascience.com/how-to-do-causal-inference-using-synthetic-controls-ab435e0228f1), [Uber](https://youtu.be/j5DoJV5S2Ao?si=RWUYFjFEWpvkl8x1), [Amazon](https://towardsdatascience.com/causal-inference-with-synthetic-control-in-python-4a79ee636325), [Netflix](https://netflixtechblog.com/round-2-a-survey-of-causal-inference-applications-at-netflix-fd78328ee0bb), [Gainwell Technologies](https://andrewpwheeler.com/2019/12/06/using-regularization-to-generate-synthetic-controls-and-conformal-prediction-for-significance-tests/), and [else](https://rudrendupaul.medium.com/causal-inference-part-7-synthetic-control-methods-a-powerful-technique-for-inferring-causality-in-3ec5dbe26038)[where](https://henamsingla.medium.com/synthetic-control-method-a-z-d28099c56edb) have gone over it, detailing different aspects of the method. Many (not of course [not all](https://peerunreviewed.blogspot.com/2019/11/a-short-tutorial-on-robust-synthetic.html)) of these go over the standard SCM. Broadly, the original SCM tends to favor, under certain technical conditions, a sparse set of control units being the underlying weights that reconstructthe factor loadings/observed values of the treated unit, pre-intervention. And while sparsity has plenty of appealing properties, such as our ability to interpret the synthetic control, sometimes this advice simply breaks down because [in some cases](https://ceistorvergata.it/public/files/RFCS/Giannone_illusion4-2.pdf) the sparsity notion is wrong. In other words, most of the coefficeints being 0 is a notion that cannot be defended. So in this post, I demonstrate [the $\ell_2$ panel data approach](https://mlsynth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pda.html#ell-2-relaxation), an econometric methodology very recently developed by [Zhentao Shi](https://zhentaoshi.github.io/) and [Yishu Wang](https://ishwang1.github.io/) which accommodates a dense data generation processes, or when the true vector of coefficient is mostly not zero.

> **Note:**  
This post goes over an extended empirical example. To see the simple and fast way to use this method, you can go to [the Python documentation](https://mlsynth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pda.html#ell-2-relaxation) of this method in my packiage ``mlsynth`` which is both slightly more technical and a lot shorter than I'll be here.

# A Review of Synthetic Controls

Let $t \in \mathbb{N}$ and $i \in \mathbb{N}$ be the time unit indices for our outcomes, $y_{it}$. Let $i = 1$ represent the treated unit, and let the remaining units, $N_0$ in total, form the control group, which remains untreated. The key challenge of causal inference is that we only have factual outcomes, which are defined as $y_{it} = y_{it}^1 d_{it} + \left(1 - d_{it}\right)y_{it}^0$, where $d_{it}$ is an indicator for whether the unit is treated ($d_{it} = 1$) or untreated ($d_{it} = 0$). An intervention occurs after time $T_{0}$, such that set $\mathcal{T}\_{1} = \\{1, 2, \ldots, T_0\\}$ corresponds to the pre-treatment period, and set $\mathcal{T}\_{2} = \\{T_0 + 1, \ldots, T\\}$ corresponds to the post-treatment period. The objective is to estimate the counterfactual $y_{1t}^0$ for the post-treatment period, or the values we would see if the treatment did not happen.

The original SCM proposes to  use least-squares regression to estimate the weights, $\mathbf{w}^{N_0} \operatorname{:=} \big\{\mathbf{w}_i \in \mathbb{R} : i \in \\{2, \ldots, N\}\big\\}$ subject to $\mathbf{w} \in [0, 1]$ and $\lVert \mathbf{w} \rVert_1 = 1$. Here, the Individual columns of the donor pool matrix, denoted like $\mathbf{Y}_0 \in \mathbb{R}^{N_0 \times T}$, are our independent variables which are multiplied by their respective weights and then added (in matrix math we'd call this the dot product). Naturally, the pre-treatment outcome vector of our treated unit, $\mathbf{y}_1 \in \mathbb{R}^{1 \times T}$, is the dependent variable. A good synthetic control satisfies $\mathbf{w}^\top \mathbf{Y}_0 \approx \mathbf{y}_1$, or good pre-treatment fit with respect to the treated unit vector.

## $\ell_2$ Relaxation

The $\ell_2$ relaxation estimates the model $\mathbf{y}_1 = \boldsymbol{\alpha}+ \mathbf{Y}_0\mathbf{w}+\mathbf{\epsilon}$, where $\boldsymbol{\alpha}$ is some unconstrained intercept we estimate after solving for the weights The main innovation with this method is the way Zhentao and Yishu propose to estimate the weights, which I think is pretty ingenious. They essentially advocate to literally exploit the pre-treatment relationships between the treated unit and donor pool, and the relationships between the donors themselves using what we would call Gram matrices. Here is the optimization:

$$

\begin{split}
\begin{aligned}
&\min_{\mathbf{w}} \frac{1}{2} \|\mathbf{w}\|_2^{2}, \quad \forall t \in \mathcal{T}_{1}, \quad \text{subject to } \| \boldsymbol{\eta} - \mathbf{\Sigma} \mathbf{w}\|_\infty \leq \tau \\
& \boldsymbol{\eta} = \frac{1}{T_1} \mathbf{Y}_0^\top \mathbf{y}_1, \\
&\mathbf{\Sigma} = \frac{1}{T_1} \mathbf{Y}_0^\top \mathbf{Y}_0, \quad \mathbf{\Sigma} \in \mathbb{R}^{N_0 \times N_0}.
\end{aligned}
\end{split}

$$


Underneath the scary matrix algebra, we have two terms to focus on here (technically three if we count the tuning parameter): _eta_ ($\boldsymbol{\eta}$) and _sigma_ ($\boldsymbol{\Sigma}$). The first term simply is [a projection](https://youtu.be/27vT-NWuw0M?si=2BTp4dKyQCz63P-C) which measures the relation between treated unit and each of the control units. It is a vector that has as many values as there are control units, where the greater the absolute value of the number, the more/less similar the donor is to the treated unit. The latter is the same, except for the control group, capturing how similar the control units are to each other. The optimization itself just finds the values of beta that bound the infinity norm (or, the maximum absolute value) of this difference, ensuring that the difference is below some constant, _tau_ $\tau$. As for the weights themselves, they are shrank towards zero, but never actually equal 0. This stands in contrast to what we would practically get from the original convex hull SCM weights and would literally get from the LASSO. Furthermore, the weights may be positive or negative.

Critical to this process is the selection of tau. In the original paper, the authors do a 70-30 train test split over the pre-intervention period, where they take the first 70% of the pre-treatment data and supply some values of tau. We then estimate the regression model, and calculate out-of-sample validation predictions. We then check the RMSE of the validation error (up until the final pre-treatment point) and select the value of tau with the lowest validation RMSE. A lower tau corresponds to an estimator closer to pure least squares, and too high a value of tau results in drastic underfitting (_trust me_, you should have seen how I was drafting the Python code for this). The way ``mlsynth`` does this, is by splitting the pre-treatment period in half, but the performance is pretty close to what Zhentao and Yishu do for their empirical example (see [the code](https://mlsynth.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pda.html#ell-2-relaxation) at the documentation).

This method offers a counterfactual prediction for dense settings. Oftentimes, a sparse model is too simplistic, especially in settings where we have very many predictors. This is especially true when we have lots of multicollinearity among our predictors (our donor pool in this case), which may be very plausible in settings with a lot of control units. The LASSO and the convex hull SCM generally struggle with this, whereas the Ridge or $\ell_2$-relaxer accomodate multicollinearity as a feature.

# Implementing $\ell_2$ relaxation in ``mlsynth``.

The second part of this post simply shows how we would use ``mlsynth`` to estimate this model. I do this using an example from Spotify
